
A Forever Phone
Posted on January 10, 2022

If you visited the Crowdsupply website over the past year or so, you may have come across the Precursor by Bunnie and Sean Cross. The Precursor is a handhdeld RISC-V device for development and secure communications. Like the developers’ previous project on Crowdsupply, the Novena, the Precursor promises to be a groundbreaking device in several ways. The security advantage of open hardware in a mobile device is the first to come to mind.

What captured my interest, however, is the Venn diagram used on their Crowdsupply page to compare the Precursor to other projects based on three qualities;

    Hackable (Unlocked and design sources are mostly available)
    Pocket-ready (Fits in a pocket with screen and battery)
    Evidence-Based Trust (Directly observable evidence of correct construction, including CPU)

Among those identified, the Librem 5 and the Pinephone are the only devices identified as being both hackable and portable. As far as the third quality, evidence-based trust, is concerned, I think the Precursor will remain in a class of its own for years to come.

There is a definite need for more discussion around the value of evidence-based trust in mobile devices, and specifically mobile phones. There are huge barriers to this including the use of proprietary components such as LTE/5G modems. That is a discussion for another day, and dare I say, one I will have to do a great deal more research on before writing up.

To come back to the Precusor’s Venn diagram, it got me to thinking about what I would choose as my distinguishing qualities in a similar Venn diagram for mobile phones. It became clear to me that there are three major qualities that I’m looking for in my “forever” phone.

    Sustainability: The hardware is sufficiently powerful to handle all major tasks smoothly and well into the future. The software is guaranteed a long support life of ten years or more.
    Security: The device should receive regular updates and security patches for ten years or more.
    Privacy: The device should not send my data to a third party (ie. Google, Facebook, Apple) unless I want it to.

The primary players are as follows:

    Stock Android Phone (Google, LG, Motorole, Samsung, Huawei, etc.)
    iPhone (Apple)
    Librem 5 (Purism)
    Pinephone and Pinephone Pro (Pine64)
    Android Phone with de-Googled ROM (ie. Lineage OS, eOS)
    Android Phone with hardened ROM (ie. Copperhead OS, Graphene OS, Calyx OS)
    Android Phone with Ubuntu Touch (UBports)
    Android Phone with Postmarketos

It doesn’t take long to narrow down the list. If you’ve been playing in the Linux mobile space for a while you’ll quickly realize that the list of finalists is frighteningly small. It is perhaps so small that it’s actually empty. Allow me to go through my rationale, where I wound up and why.

Stock Android phones and iPhones are receiving a bit more support lately. Google’s Pixel phones are receiving about a year of support more than they used to. I still use an iPhone SE that I purchased over five years ago. It still receives security patches and runs the latest iOS. In every sense, it has Quality 2 (Q2) in the bag. That being said, neither Apple or stock Android devices can claim a long support life of ten years or more. Neither Apple or stock Android devices can claim security patches for ten years or more. Lastly, both collect user data in contravention of Q3.

That removes the major players but still leaves us with considerable choice. There are the Android phones running de-Googled and Android phones running hardened and de-Googled. Both succeed at Q3 so long as you don’t install Gapps. Research has shown that Lineage OS and eOS, without Gapps, don’t send data to third parties. I believe the hardened Android ROMs do about the same. I’ve heard battery life can be extraordinary, upwards of five days to a week on a single charge. As far as Q1 (Sustainability) is concerned, I think that several of these projects will continue to flourish well into the next decade. Unfortunately, your phone will not. De-Googled Android phones fail at Q2 (Security) as quickly as stock Android phones. They will suffer from insecure software the moment the manufacturer stops releasing updated kernels for the device. It takes time and money to add proprietary drivers to a new secure Android kernel. There is little to no incentive to continue doing so when they would rather sell you a new phone with the updated kernel.

Ubuntu Touch is somewhat in the same boat. Ubuntu Touch runs inside Halium, a sort of virtual machine on an Android phone. It is relatively secure because it uses AppArmor and by default sets the memory as “Read only” unless you run some commands inside the terminal to change it to “Read/Write”. That being said, the modem still runs outside Ubuntu Touch, using the drivers from the original Android kernel. Ubuntu touch comes impressively close to having all the Qs, but comes up short with Q2 (Security). A mobile phone with a modem running on an expired kernel cannot be considered secure. That being said, we are not finished with Ubuntu Touch yet. It has a future elsewhere.
Ubuntu Touch running Ubuntu 16.04 LTS and a 3.4.0 Cyanogenmod Linux Kernel on a Google Nexus 5

Moving on to the big boys of Linux mobile; the Librem 5 and the Pinephone an Pinephone Pro. Out of the gates, the Pinephone does not excel with Q1, in so far as it is slow and difficult to use as a daily driver. Apart from that, however, it does considerably well. There is no third party data collection and the Pinephone will continue to receive updates from the open source community and security patches from the mainline Linux kernel. The issue is the modem. Quectel’s black box. There have been attempts to replace Quectel’s modem drivers with open source drivers, but it must be said that these attempts remain in progress and are incomplete at best. Quectel’s modem is running its own instance of Linux, and there are too many unknowns to consider it secure. We will delve into the distinction of black boxes from China and black boxes from the US and Europe a bit later.

The Pinephone Pro promises to provide the power that the Pinephone lacked. If this is the case, I can see a bright future for the Pinephone Pro. If the Quectel modem’s drivers can be entirely replaced with open source code, that will likely cement it as my “forever” phone.

The Librem 5 is a bit of Pinephone and a bit of Pinephone Pro. The CPU is more powerful than the Pinephone, and, in theory at least, it has the potential to hold up as a daily driver. The primary issue it has with the three Qs is that of security. Purism promised to source LTE modems from Gemalto, a European brand now owned by and operating under Thales Group. They were supposed to be built in the US on M.2 chips specifically for the Librem 5. Had they been guaranteed at purchase, I would have probably ordered a Librem 5. In the end, that promise appears to have gone by the way of many other broken promises made by Purism. There hasn’t been any talk of the Gemalto modems for a while and they are packaging a masterpiece of open source hardware with a closed source modem from a Chinese vendor named Broadmobi. The Librem 5 is an exciting platform regardless of the brand of modem, but I would not claim that it is secure.

Android phones running Postmarketos are plentiful but very few have the capacity to run the mainline Linux kernel and make and receive phone calls and text messages. A recent document posted by Martjin Braam beautifully summarized the state of the mainline kernel on Postmarketos and other Linux mobile devices. I was surprised to see how few Qualcomm modems are currently being supported. In my opinion, the number of Qualcomm modems on this list will remain small. As an owner of a Moto G4 Play running PostmarketOS and Phosh, it is a joy to be able to implement so many aspects of the three Qs in a single phone. That said, I’m aware that the Qualcomm modem drivers are non-free, and are incorporated into PostmarketOS with the help of the lk2nd bootloader. I love Postmarketos for its attempt at sustainability and will continue to support it for that reason. That being said, the current options with the capacity to place and receive telephone calls are limited and most of those don’t have enough power to run Phosh smoothly.
PostmarketOS running Phosh and a 5.15.0 Linux Kernel on a Motorola Moto G4 Play

This brings me back to my earlier reference to closed source modems from Chinese, US, and European vendors; Quectel and Broadmobi, Qualcomm, and Gemalto respectively. At the end of the day, if you want to be connected to the Internet using a mobile device, place and receive telephone calls, and send and receive text messages, you will need to make use of a closed source modem of some sort. Who you trust is up to you. Perhaps you shouldn’t trust anyone, or perhaps you can trust one a little more than another. Maybe trust is irrelevant because when you implement old drivers that have gone unpatched for years, the security vulnerability exists regardless of vendor or country of origin. It might be fair to say that an individual in the US can hack an outdated Quectel modem as easily as an individual in China can hack an outdated Qualcomm modem. That sounds about right.

So where does the mobile Linux community go from here? What do we strive for? As far as Q1 (Sustainability) is concerned, we need a sufficiently powerful device. I believe the Pinephone Pro is that device. I love my Moto G4 Play with PostmarketOS, Phosh, and a Qualcomm modem but it can’t play basic YouTube videos at full frames. The Librem 5 also achieves Q1 with one small asterisks. Purism has been steadily raising the price of the Librem 5. This may be to make up for the financial shortfalls of years past. It is therefore entirely possible that Purism will go bankrupt at some point in the coming years and will be forced to stop developing Phosh. The project would undoubtedly live on in the open source community, but regardless, the loss of Purism would be a huge setback to Linux mobile.

Q2 (Security) is achieved with Linux mobile primarily through the use of mainline Linux. My Moto G4 Play receives security patches regularly from Alpine Linux and PostmarketOS. The Qualcomm modem goes unpatched but remains viable and, for what its worth, is of US origin. The path taken by Ubuntu Touch is also noteworthy here. By implementing AppArmor and setting the memory to Read-Only, Ubuntu Touch has taken security to a level that remains unmatched in Linux mobile. Perhaps there is something to be learned here, but I suspect Linux mobile users will want to keep their access to “sudo”. Over all, the most promising road to achieving Q2 is through the reverse-engineering of the Quectel modem in the Pinephone Pro. Short of mainlining the drivers, they can be audited and updated regularly by the community for years to come.

Q3 (Privacy) is something Linux phones excel at and will become increasingly desirable as time goes on. I hope nothing changes here.

I selected the three qualities of sustainability, security, and privacy because I they are all critically important to my choice of a “forever” phone. There are several other issues, such as dismal battery life and missed calls, that need to be resolved on Linux phones but I see these fixes as inevitable. The greatest challenge ahead will be to take control of the most closed of closed sources, the modem. As far as I can tell, there was no attempt to put a modem inside the Precursor. There are likely many good reasons for not doing so, but this choice may also speak volumes about the challenges ahead for Linux mobile and my Forever Phone.
